In the early 1960s Muhammad Speaks paid considerable attention to the
Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. Editorials and cartoons juxtaposed King's
nonviolent push for desegregation with the Black Nationalist call for
self-determination. The February 1962 issue of Muhammad Speaks featured a
particularly harsh critique of Dr. King's leadership in the civil rights
movement, including illustrations by Eugene Majied that satirized everything
from King's association with President Kennedy to the perceived
absurdity of his philosophy of nonviolence.

One of the most striking cartoons in the issue, titled "On Dangerous Ground,"
shows King being pulled in opposite directions, almost causing him to fall into
a chasm as the earth opens beneath him. At each end of the chasm are messages:
on the right, a crucifix with a single nail bearing a sign that reads, "Billy
Graham's Dec. 18 statement to Pentagon Militarists that Jesus was no pacifist
and that freedom must sometimes be defended through war." On the left, a
signpost displays, "Gandhi's India Takes Bold Step to Reclaim Its Land in GOA."

Inside the widening chasm another message reads "King's attempt to borrow
from other peoples' religious philosophies." Majied wants readers to see
King's attempt to present nonviolence as a Christian value as contradictory to
the role Christianity is playing in justifying violence. Similarly, Majied wants
readers to recognize that in 1961, when India's nonviolent efforts failed in
Goa, Indian armed forces annexed Portuguese-controlled region. The criticism
is unmistakable: King's political stance and moral philosophy lack foundation,
with his sources of inspiration contradicting his beliefs.

This critique of King is less about a personal attack and more about
illustrating the rivalry between Black Nationalism and integration. Below the
cartoon is an editorial titled "East is East, West is West," which positions
Black Nationalists in America alongside global struggles for independence from
white domination. In contrast, it criticizes American desegregation activists
who "fight for the claim of equal ownership in the white man's house"
instead of seeking their own liberation.

Importantly, this artwork is relevant to the events of the day. The image's
publication coincided with Martin Luther King Jr's nonviolent direct-action
campaign in Albany, Georgia. The ambitious campaign to end racial segregation
brought together local organizers and national civil rights leaders, but failed
to make immediate gains, being widely characterized as a setback for the civil
rights movement. So at the very moment that King seemed to be losing political
ground, Majied's artwork was hitting street corners across the country,
depicting King's struggle not as a political setback, but as a failure of
ideas, and seizing the moment to reframe Black liberation through the ideals of
Black Nationalism.
