Many early scholars of the Nation of Islam judged the movement to be one
primarily political as opposed to religious in nature. Journalists, government
officials, and some African American critics of the movement in the 1950s
and 1960s often dismissed the religious elements of the Nation of Islam as
insincere. It was called a cult and its leader, Elijah Muhammad, was seen as a
cult leader.

But that is not how tens of thousands of his followers saw him. To them, he
was a genuine religious prophet who led a movement that was both religious and
political, a whole way of life. These members testified how their prophet,
Elijah Muhammad, had saved their lives. Elijah Muhammad's interpretation
of Islam offered mental and physical healing, as Eugene Majied's cartoon
titled "Our Great Physician" illustrates. Signing his name "Majied XXX" on
the bed, the NOI cartoonist takes a verse from the Qur'an that most Muslims
understand as referring to the Prophet Muhammad of Arabia, who was said to be
illiterate. Instead, Majied applies it to Elijah Muhammad, an African American
man born in 1897 in Sandersville, Georgia, a man who was indeed born among
other Black people whose literacy had been outlawed in the slaveholding South.

Dressing respectably in the Nation of Islam's required male clothing
of bow tie and suit, but also holding the Qur'an and donning his fez or
"starry crown", Elijah Muhammad is presented here as the one leader who can
cure African Americans from what the Nation of Islam identified as the Black
pathologies created by white supremacy. The patient's medical diagnosis,
placed at the edge of the bed in the same position as a typical hospital chart
of the time, claims that all 20 million Black people were deaf and dumb. That
is, they had lost their true identity as Black and Muslim people. The patient
reaches toward the one man who can cure him from the wounds of physical and
mental slavery, represented in this cartoon by a sneering white man holding a
whip. This visual shows that by following the teachings of Elijah Muhammad,
the patient can leave behind all the pathological manifestations of an
enslaved mentality. The symbols of that old are scattered beneath his hospital
bed. They include Christianity, represented by a cross pendant; violent street
crime, represented by the handgun; and sexual immorality, represented by the
pornographic magazine entitled "Lust."

For members of the Nation of Islam, Elijah Muhammad's interpretation of
Islam offered a scientific and practical path to worldly salvation, safety,
and self-improvement, all of which became visually embodied in their dignified
dress and diet as well as the way they held their heads high as they walked
through life.
