Elijah Muhammad was a genius. He was a person with not even a high school
education who organized a movement of tens of thousands of people. One knack
that he had, that pertained to my job as executive editor of the Muhammad
Speaks newspaper, was his ability to create slogans and headlines. He composed
almost all of the slogans and headlines that were used in the newspaper,
especially the front page, the front cover.Phrases, like, "disagreeable to
live with in peace!" would be a headline I can always remember. And, he created
headlines for the ads, too.

So, he was trying to build an organization that appealed to people on an
individual level --- "do-for-self," was perhaps the most often repeated phrase
--- and, create group unity at the same time. He says, "do-for-self" in a
way, so that you as a person, being appealed to, can identify with it --- it's
going to help you out --- but, you're in effect thinking not just of yourself,
but you're also thinking of the others who are doing-for-self along with you in
these organizations. So you're automatically placed in the context of thinking
for a larger group, at the same time as you think of your own self, in your
own self-interest. Thus, when you are pursuing "do-for-self" in what might
be called a healthy and effective, as opposed to selfish, way, you're also
building your group strength and cohesion as well as your sense of identity. So
that's the way Elijah Muhammad approached that concept, and developed it.

His other major slogans promised believers and followers, as well as
other members of the Black community, education, money, good homes and
friendship. Elijah Muhammad was often criticized as if he preached hate, or
some kind of reactionary nationalism. But education, money, good homes and
friendship are as American as apple pie and Chevrolet cars. The "do-for-self,"
and related slogans, buy into the whole notion of advancing one's economic
security and status. Of course, the pursuit of happiness was an unusual item
in the Declaration of Independence of the United States, and other countries
don't seem to have that clause. So Elijah Muhammad was right in line with
conventional American values, as enunciated by the country's founders. He's
right in step with them, except that he's dealing with a group of people,
namely, African Americans, who have been prevented, systematically, from
achieving every one of those goals --- in fact, who were barred from achieving
them by the Constitution itself.

So how does the overcome this hurdle? By creating and supporting organizations
that are independently funded by blacks, and whose goals and agendas are set
by ourselves. I don't know how he articulated all these concepts and goals
to himself. It's almost as if it was just in him somehow, to form these
associations and to effectively organize right out of the prisons.

So, he essentially is saying to the Black community, "I'm going to take your
worst outcast. Your most uneducated; maybe those who've been in prison. And
I'm going to clean him up and I'll get him off alcohol. I'll get them off,
not just alcohol, but tobacco, off fats. Off the pig, off the Christian
doctrine." So, whatever destructive habits and beliefs which they were
habituated were his target.

Other recovery organizations did the same thing by redirecting actions and
implementing discipline. It's a pretty effective mode of operating, but how you
do it is another matter. Elijah Muhammad had a cadre of ministers, and they
had to show their effectiveness by coming out of the prisons. He too, spent
time in prison because of he had refused to obey the draft law in the World War
Two era, and the goal consisted, once he was out, of organizing in the prisons
and recruiting former prisoners, by training them through lectures, readings,
studies, etc., all focused around Muslim or Quranic teachings.  So, this was a
big part of his "do-for-self". Self study and group study were major elements
of his program. I think Elijah Muhammad just had an insight, that people
from anywhere in the world, if they start going through the steps of reading,
studying, getting along with one another, showing discipline in their work,
and in their home life, and having some kind of common culture, they can all
turn into something.  They can all better themselves, and they can turn into a
social force. And that, in essence, is "do-for-self".
