Hello, my name is Lola Cindric. I'm currently a PhD candidate in social
anthropology at the School for Advanced Studies in Social Sciences of
Paris. This presentation focuses on the crafts of stone inlay, known in South
Asia as Pacchikari, and on how British consumers appropriated and informed
local crafts in the colonial context, between 1840 and 1914.

In 1860, Lady Canning, the vicereine of India, was living in Kolkata when she
entrusted Marian Loveday Murray, a female British resident of Agra, with the
mission of ordering and supervising the making of stone inlaid artifacts. The
patterns used for these objects were borrowed from the Taj Mahal, which had
been built more than 200 years earlier. The correspondence between Canning and
Murray, which I identified in the British Library, reveals that Murray visited
the Taj Mahal itself, accompanied by Nathu Ram, the owner of a stone laying and
carving workshop.

The purpose of their visit was to ensure that the stone inlaid patterns would
be faithfully reproduced, just as they were inside the mausoleum.

Marian Murray was the wife of the Scottish surgeon John Murray, who remained
famous not only for his medical achievements in India, but also for being
a photographer. John Murray's extant photographic work includes some of
the earliest images of Mughal monuments, such as this audience hall in Agra
Fort. Later on, John Murray would be credited by George Birdwood for nothing
less than reviving the craft of stone inlay in Agra, which was claimed to have
died out after the reign of the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb.

Yet stone inlay continued to be used in buildings commissioned by a few
patrons during the second half of the 18th century and the beginning of the
19th century. From the 1840s onwards, the commissions of British patrons gave
a significant impetus to this artisanal production. British patronage led to
the creation of a novel typology of exotic commodities meant to adorn domestic
interiors.

Patterns from the Taj Mahal were copied and applied onto homewares such as
the vase shown here. It is shaped like a cornucopia, a symbol of abundance in
ancient Greek mythology and decorated with flower and gray patterns emulating
those seen on Shah Jahan cenotaph. In other words, this vase epitomizes the
process of adopting and adapting Mughal technique and iconography by British
patrons during the colonial period.

Before further discussing such exotic wares, let us first explore the Mughal
craft of stone inlaying. It is sometimes referred to as pietra dura, that is,
hard stone in Italian or Florentine mosaic in English and in Hindi and Urdu,
as Pacchikari from the Persian term Pacchikari, meaning inlay work. This craft
was introduced to South Asia in the early 16th century, thanks to the patronage
of the Mughal dynasty, and reached its apex during the first half of the 17th
century under the reign of the emperor Shah Jahan.

Particularly time consuming, this technique consists in inlaying sections of
variously colorful stones into sockets carved out of a marble matrix. Sections
are selected on stone slabs for the natural colors and shades, then cut and
finally inlaid into the matrix. Such Pacchikari decorations were one element
among others, constituting the singular and lavish character of Shah Jahan's
architecture. The prestige of Mughal buildings garnered interest among British
colonizers, and resulted in the first half of the 19th century in a series of
lootings that betrayed the specific desire to possess physical fragments of
such monuments.

Pieces of decorative ornament, Pacchikari stone inlaid panels extracted from
buildings in Agra, were eventually sold on the art market or to museums. While
the example of this frieze is now preserved in the Victoria and Albert
Museum in London, others were using furniture like in tabletops and cabinets,
including in the famous grade bookcase, now in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford.

During the 1800s, the mobility of people, information and goods between Great
Britain and its colonies significantly increased with the implementation of
imperial rule. New maritime routes and technological innovations such as trains
and railways also facilitated global sea and land travel, thus enabling the
development of a colonial tourism, especially during the second half of the
19th century.

With the British imperial project and its correlated tourism industry, the
engagement with South Asia took the form of not only a spatial conquest,
but, as the scholar Bernard Cohen has suggested, also an epistemological one
aiming at rendering familiar a faraway and unintelligible world. One of these
attempts, manifested in the many representations of Mughal architecture through
drawings and watercolors, now known as company paintings, which depict entire
buildings or menu details of their decoration.

Mostly made by native draftsmen for British customers, these paintings were
widely circulated in the metropole, making Mughal aesthetics familiar to
British audiences. During this period, as Santiago de Boer further argues,
Mughal buildings were portrayed by British others as remains of a dying empire
with cities in decline, albeit through a romanticizing lens.

Above all, the Taj Mahal structure was regarded as a powerful symbol of wealth
and prestige. Its decoration was praised as the utmost expression of human
genius, and it was poetically imagined as the ultimate monument of love. On
more political grounds, however, the appropriation of Mughal architecture by
the colonial administration served to symbolize the predecessor's overthrow
and assert British control over India. In the making of stone inlaid artifacts
during the colonial period, patterns were derived, most especially from the
cenotaph, so Shah Jahan and his wife Mumtaz Mahal inside the Taj Mahal.

These cenotaphs are composed of stone inlaid scrolling and interlacing
biomorphic patterns, including fruits, flowers and leaves, depicted in the
naturalistic yet stylized manner and arranged in a symmetric composition,
characteristic of Mughal art in general. As archival sources, a number of
company paintings, such as the one seen here, showcase the British fascination
for the Taj Mahal's Pacchikari program, sequenced in drawings decline in
various scales of detailed views.

These visual renditions on paper in turn catalyzed the commissioning of
domestic artifacts, engaging with the Mughal stone inlay aesthetic. The new
objects, ordered from private workshops by British customers, included most
prominently paperweights, trays, plates, vases and other kinds of containers,
and quills, tabletops, chess boards, caskets, and boxes. The corpus of
homewares I gathered total about 100 objects preserved in various collections
worldwide.

Despite their new forms, the material structure remained similar to Mughal,
particulary following the same process of inlaying sections of colorful stones
into a monolithic matrix of white marble. But most importantly, the use of
such artifacts radically changed, shifting from architectural ornaments to
wares intended for domestic use. Such small, portable objects were meant to
circulate. They were either commissioned or purchased locally as souvenirs.

Additionally, in the international and colonial exhibitions organized during
the second half of the 19th century, such objects were displayed to large
audiences as material evidence of India's achievements in artisanal matters. At
such exhibitions, they could also be purchased along with other kinds of goods
crafted in the same exotic manner.

Taken altogether, such objects aim to convey, quote unquote, authentic
Indian design. But such design evolved the appropriation of local knowhow and
iconographic repertoires in alignment with British centered aesthetic tastes
and their concomitant market forces. As the example of Lady Canning clearly
attests, British patrons selected Pacchikari patterns from the Taj Mahal
cenotaph, which were then copied and interchangeably applied on domestic items
familiar to them, such as this marble inlaid tabletop.

Following Mughal compositions that remain mostly symmetrical but differently
arranged, the obsession with the Taj Mahal took a new material form in the
stone inlaid items produced during the 19th century. The creative process
behind these objects is as follows: it first entails selecting patterns from
the cenotaph and copying them on a paper material; after this transfer of
design onto a supple medium, simple Pacchikari patterns are mixed and matched,
arranged into different compositions and applied to homewares, as can be seen
on this tray.

The particular pattern of the Great Bundle and leaf, as found on
Shah Jahan cenotaphs, has gone through a similar process of visual and
material transfer. Among others, it has been extracted and rearranged on
an intricately inlaid inkstand, as well as a more minimalistically designed
paperweight. Moreover, this crape bundle and leaf pattern, which is common in
both European and Mughal iconography, was chosen as the main decorative pattern
for this tabletop, bearing in its center the coat of arms of Lord Curzon.

This table was specially made and gifted to Lord Curzon by the municipality of
Agra on the day of his nomination as Viceroy of India in 1899. This particular
tabletop offers a fruitful case to discern the symbolic power at stake in
this kind of objects. Indeed, Mughal Pacchikari is to be understood as the
articulation of strength and durability which could be conveyed through stone
better than any other medium.

With their patterns conceived for architectural purposes, shrunk onto smaller
movable objects under British patronage, such objects were appropriated the
artistic vocabulary of the Mughal dynasty. This creative stone inlay process
also complemented the Victorian fascination with miniaturization, as a few
small scale models of the Taj Mahal cenotaphs attest. These objects form part
of a wider production of miniature models of the Taj Mahal, made in marble or
in alabaster by carvers, sometimes in the same workshops as stone inlayers.

This is apparent from the output of the workshop of Nathu Ram, from whom Lady
Canning commissioned her inlaid items. Thriving throughout the 19th century, it
was the most important and famous workshop among the small network of workshops
in Agra, which created inlaid works and architectural models, mostly for
tourists. As the craft of Pacchikari entered a free market during that century,
its commodification corresponded to the demand for exotic designs and goods to
decorate its European interiors.

Mughal iconography fitted the tasteful, flat, yet colorful designs promoted by
mid-19th century design reformers in Britain, such as Henry Cole, Digby Wyatt
or Owen Jones. The production of those exotic yet familiar goods utilized local
artisanal skills and appropriated Mughal patterns while catering to modern
British fashions and an interest in making empire visible in the domestic
home. Therefore, while these colonial objects were known household objects and
similar in their ornamentation to earlier Mughal models, the continuities and
disruptions between Mughal and colonial productions allowed British customers
to both associate with and distinguish themselves from Mughal aesthetics.

During the colonial period, the craft of Pacchikari shifted towards two main
modalities of consumption: the commission of moveable artifacts, mostly by
British patrons, from the middle of the 19th century; and, in the last decades
of the century, the purchase of souvenirs in Agra itself, within the context of
an increase in tourism. As historians of colonialism have discussed, engaging
with local monuments went hand in hand with the colonial enterprise and the
attempts to assert authority over foreign land made more familiar by the study
and appropriation of its artistic productions.

The tourist guide, published by Nathu Ram firm, shows how in turn, locals
used this connection for their own commercial purpose, promoting heritage
to draw customers into the consumption of artisanal commodities, visually
referring to local Mughal heritage. This production process thus spotlights the
interconnectedness of local heritage, international tourism and contemporary
artisanal production. This triad can still be detected in Agra today, where
the production of Pacchikari appears to follow the style initiated during the
colonial period, now known as Phul patti, meaning flower-leaf.

These commodities are produced for customers, mostly in the context of tourism
or export, in a style reminiscent of the Mughal artistic heritage that is
celebrated all over the city by the tourism industry and coveted by tourists
themselves. While the quality of such artifacts has dropped in recent decades,
their value still resides in their perception of so-called traditional and thus
authentic Indian crafts.

Just like during the colonial period, these expensive objects of leisurely
consumption convey the economic and cultural capital of their owners, extracted
from local inlaid buildings, and carried elsewhere throughout the world.
