In July 1970, a cartoon by NOI artist Gerald 2X appeared in Muhammad
Speaks. Comprising two stacked panels, it appeared in the NOI newspaper's
supplementary insert dedicated to explaining "The Messenger Muhammad's
Program." Entitled "Hospitals...," this pictorial spread seeks to expose how
the White American health system correlates to diner foods under its control.

In the top panel, a heavy-set Black man sits across from a cigar-smoking
white man at an elevated desk and chair. His enlarged furniture, cigar, and
pinstriped suit signal a position of power. Below appears an exclamation
uttered by the white man: "Why do you say we need more hospitals? We have
plenty hospitals --- It's you people that need hospitals!" This statement
creates a clear divide between the healthcare systems of white Americans and
African Americans that is further emphasized by the underlining of the pronouns
"we" and "you."

Moving down, in the lower panel sit two black diner customers at a counter
opposite a black waiter in uniform. He is carrying a platter with a pig's
head. On the wall behind him are advertisements for "Hog Maws," "Chitterling
Soup," and "Porkchops and Butter Beans," all foods associated with the American
South and considered fattening within the image's overarching message. In
the foreground, the two seated men include one, on the right, who appears
visibly ill with growths protruding from his shirt and numerous jagged lines
surrounding his body to signal his physical discomfort. Similarly, the waiter's
skin is entirely covered in bumps and lesions, with a large bandage appearing
on his lower back. All three Black men are shown overweight and ill yet
unconcerned about their health as the caption at the bottom notes: "Healthy as
people are nowadays I can't see the necessity of a hospital."

The superposition of these two images effectively connects poor diet,
specifically pork, with the poor health of African Americans dependent on
a cheap, white-dominated food system. It also visually translates Elijah
Muhammad's program concerned with diet and well-being, especially as
expounded in his How to Eat to Live. In this and other writings, the NOI
leader often refers to swine in nauseating terms, calling it "poisonous"
"filth" that "fattens." He goes into detail about the lazy, unintelligent, and
parasite-prone nature of pigs intended for white consumption, and not black
diets. Moreover, rejecting pig enabled Elijah Muhammad to forward Islamic
dietary practices known as halal (literally meaning "permissible").

Within NOI spheres, foods associated with slavery and the South were thus
reframed as the primary cause of Black obesity and sickness as spread through
America's white-owned fast-food industry. By avoiding such establishments
for both food and jobs, securing their own agricultural lands, and raising
sheep and cows instead of pigs, members of the Black community could put
into practice forms of self-preservation. Moreover, by framing such dietary
practices as halal and rooted in "Allah's earth," Elijah Muhammad and the
graphic artists of Muhammad Speaks effectively equated good health with Islam
as a form of both physical and spiritual salvation.
