Hello. My name is Stefan Kamola, and today I will share with you the story of
a remarkable individual, Rashid al-Din, who lived in Iran in the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries, when the region was ruled by Mongols. I prepared
this talk in collaboration with my colleague Jonathan Brack. We are both
scholars of the intellectual and cultural history of the medieval Middle East
and Central Asia, and we have been talking and writing about Rashid al-Din for
many years. Rashid al-Din is most famous for creating a historical collection
called the Compendium of Chronicles, or Jami' al-Tawarikh. I will discuss the
Compendium along with Rashid al-Din's other projects that helped shape the
history of Iran during the Mongol period.

Chinggis Khan, the founder of the Mongol Empire, led his armies across
Asia. When they arrived in Iran in 1219, many people there thought it was a
sign of the end of the world. Chinggis Khan declared himself the "scourge
of God," and the historian Ibn al-Athir lamented having to write "the
obituary of Islam" as Mongol forces stormed across Iran, overrunning cities
and strongholds. However, instead of ushering in an apocalypse, the Mongol
conquests set in motion a wave of political, cultural, and religious changes
that shaped the subsequent history of the region. And indeed, within a century,
descendants of Chinggis Khan ruled Iran as Muslim sovereigns.

One of the most influential individuals and largest personalities of the
remarkable Mongol period was not a Mongol, but a Persian administrator named
Fadl-Allah, known to history as Rashid al-Din. His early life was defined
by the hardships of the Mongol invasions, but by the last years of the 13th
century, when he was about fifty years old, he had climbed to the pinnacle
of political influence. Over the next two decades, he shaped the policy of
the Mongol state; wrote works in genres as diverse as history, theology, and
agronomy; and invested his fantastic wealth on building projects that both
guaranteed his own historical memory and set a standard for future rulers and
administrators.

In this talk, I will describe Rashid al-Din's life against the backdrop
of history during the period of Mongol rule in Iran. I will then turn to his
works to show how he both made history and helped record it. First, I will show
how Rashid al-Din's historical work, the Compendium of Chronicles, tells
us much about the Mongols themselves and about the continent over which they
ruled. Next, we will see what his theological and scientific works reveal about
him as a thinker and about the intellectual climate in Iran as he and others
worked to make sense of the new social and political realities of Mongol rule.

Chinggis Khan's invasion of 1219 was not the end of the world. The
Mongol armies withdrew in 1223 almost as suddenly as they had appeared. A
decade later, Mongol armies again campaigned in northern Iran and Anatolia,
establishing the first durable Mongol presence. Even this, however, was only a
limited military occupation, confined mostly to the areas shown here in red,
and not a monolithic government. Indigenous political powers remained, most
notably the caliphate, based in Baghdad, and a dispersed network of strongholds
in mountainous regions shown in purple, staffed by the followers of the
Isma'ili Shi'i Imam.

These leaders -—- caliph and imam --- resisted Mongol claims to govern Iran
and Iraq, and in the 1250s a third Mongol campaign marched across Asia to put
an end to them and to establish permanent, unchallenged Mongol rule over the
region. The leader of this new campaign, Hülegü, was a grandson of Chinggis
Khan. This manuscript painting from almost two centuries later depicts the
process of negotiation that led to the surrender of the Isma'ili imam in
1256. Hülegü's arrival turned the Mongol military occupation of the Middle
East into a royal dynastic state.

Hülegü secured the surrender of the Isma'ili imam and then of the caliph and
overtook the capital of Baghdad in early 1258, putting an end to five centuries
of regional leadership by the 'Abbasid dynasty. He established a new capital
at Maragha, on the high plains of northern Iran, where his nomadic army could
find pasture for their horses and herds more easily than in the hot lowlands
around Baghdad.

Between waves of Mongol invasion, Fadl-Allah, the future Rashid al-Din,
was born around 1247 into a family of Jewish doctors from the city of
Hamadan. Eventually, this family—including Fadl-Allah, who was barely ten
when Hülegü arrived—lived and worked in the new Mongol capital, first in
Maragha and later in Tabriz, after Hülegü's son moved the capital there.

From the age of ten to fifty, we don't know much about Rashid, except that
he converted to Islam, gained trust among the Mongol elites, and served for
a spell as governor in the southern city of Yazd. In 1297 he catapulted
in prominence to the head of the administration as the personal advisor
to Hülegü's great-grandson Ghazan Khan and then to Ghazan's brother,
Khodabanda Öljeitü. During that time, in addition to helping run the state,
Rashid al-Din produced numerous scholarly works, to which we will turn shortly.

Each time he presented one of these works to Öljeitü, the latter rewarded him
with money and property, much of which Rashid al-Din used to endow a series
of new institutions he built across Mongol Iran. These included mosques and
madrasas, hospitals and hostels, and a network of scriptoria, or kitabkhanas,
for the copying of books, including Rashid al-Din's own works. The largest of
these endowments was called "Rashid's quarter" located on the outskirts
of Tabriz, shown here.

Rashid al-Din's works illuminate the Mongol world as well as the mind of
their author. His most famous text is also his first. In the first years of
the fourteenth century, Ghazan Khan asked Rashid al-Din to write a dynastic
history of the Mongols. According to Rashid al-Din, Ghazan was concerned that
the various historical notes and stories kept by members of the Mongol elite
were at risk of being lost, as was the living memory of elder Mongols who had
experienced the rise of the Empire first-hand. Left unstated is the fact that
Ghazan Khan was involved in a war of ideas with the Mamluk sultans of Egypt
over who was the rightful ruler of the region and legitimate protector of
Islam. This gave him a good reason to advertise the credentials of his family.

Rashid al-Din was granted unprecedented access to materials and individuals to
construct a history of the Mongol Empire. The result is the Blessed History
of Ghazan, or Tārikh-e Mobārak-e Ghāzāni, named after its patron. Ghazan
is also one of the heroes of the work: his story comes last and takes up more
space than any other except for that of Chinggis Khan. The whole work, in fact,
is a kind of long zoom shot narrowing in on Ghazan's life. It begins with a
survey of the many nomadic tribes that had joined Chinggis Khan's empire,
then tells the family history of the Mongol rulers from their legendary
ancestress Alan Qo'a down through Chinggis Khan to the branches of his
family, settling finally on the branch that ruled Iran.

Two major themes carry through this story: genealogy and monotheism. Ghazan
had usurped the throne from his uncle in a military coup, and Ghazan's
father, grandfather, and great-grandfather were all junior princes in their
own generations, so Rashid al-Din had to make the case that his patron had
rightfully come to the throne. On the other hand, the Mamluk Sultans of
Egypt were a peculiar type of political arrangement, in which slave soldiers
torn from their home on the steppe populated the army, some of them rising
through the ranks until one of them became sultan, often by assassinating his
predecessor. In this way, they didn't have the same sense of genealogical
continuity as most other dynasties, and so the Blessed History draws a sharp
contrast between the Mongols, with their rich genealogical memory, and the
slave sultans of Egypt. The Blessed History is built around the genealogy
of the Mongols, but it also emphasizes other strong genealogical traditions,
such as those of the Arabs or of the Oghuz Turks, including the former Seljuq
sultans of the region.

One thing Ghazan's Mamluk rivals did have was a strong tradition of supporting
Islam, whereas Ghazan himself had only converted in the course of his coup. In
addition to presenting his patron as a devout Muslim, Rashid al-Din argues for
a spirit of monotheistic faith running through Mongol history. To make this
argument, he draws again on the Turko-Mongol legend of Oghuz Khan, as well as
the biblical story of the patriarch Abraham. These two individuals --- one of
them from the Judeo-Islamic tradition, the other from the nomadic tradition ---
were both communal founding figures who rejected the polytheism of those around
them and followed a single god. This manuscript painting from shortly after
the reign of Ghazan shows Abraham destroying pagan statues, depicted here as
figures of the Buddha.

The Blessed History is our best single source for the history of the Mongol
Empire and especially of the Mongols in Iran. However, it is not a neutral
text, as it presents its subject in a light most suited for Ghazan's
political needs. A similar thing can be said about the world history that
Ghazan's brother Öljeitü commissioned in 1304 as the second volume
of the Compendium of Chronicles. This second volume has twelve chapters,
which can be divided into two main parts. The first part tells the history
of eastern Islamic lands, from the time of Adam until the eve of Hülegü's
conquest. The folios of the Edinburgh manuscript copy of the Compendium come
from different parts of this portion of the work.

The second part contains summary histories of other lands and societies across
Eurasia: the Oghuz Turks and the Jews, China, Europe, and India. Several folios
from these sections now in the Khalili Collection come originally from the
same copy of the Compendium of Chronicles as the folios in Edinburgh. The
Edinburgh and Khalili folios from this world history are most famous for
their paintings, but the text is also noteworthy: the scholar Karl Jahn once
called it "a sensational and unique novelty." For the histories of China,
Europe, and India, Rashid al-Din did not rely on earlier texts written in the
Islamic world, which were largely ignorant of these distant lands. Instead,
he had access to relatively recent histories produced by the subject societies
themselves.

The same is notable in the case of his unique chapter on the history of
the Children of Israel --- the Jews, for which he used Jewish midrashic (or
exegetical) sources that had never before been used by Muslim authors. The fact
that he reproduces these histories, including several ideas that contradict
Islamic ideas about history and cosmology, has earned Rashid al-Din praise
as an ecumenical and modern thinker ahead of his time. He also made the work
accessible to different audiences. The original Compendium of Chronicles was
written in Persian and then translated into Arabic, so that it could be read
across the region. This was done in Rashid al-Din's kitabkhana in Tabriz, where
copies like this one were created, illustrated, and sent out across the realm:
Arabic copies to Arabic-speaking cities, Persian copies to Persian-speaking
cities. We do not know what city this copy was sent to. However, it is dated as
being produced in Tabriz in 1314, so it may well be that Rashid al-Din held it
in his own hands seven centuries ago.

Beyond this historical masterpiece, what do we know about Rashid al-Din's
intellectual world? Quite a lot, actually, thanks mainly to Rashid al-Din
himself. He was a prolific author: beyond his historical writings, he composed
treatises on religious matters, including theology and exegesis of the Qur'an,
on philosophy, and on sciences from medicine and physiology to farming and
agronomy. His treatises cover eclectic topics, which demonstrates his vast
interests as well as the concerns and interests of his royal Mongol patrons
Ghazan and Öljeitü. In many cases, Rashid al-Din responds to questions posed
to him by those attending the rulers' court during formal intellectual and
religious debates or in more informal exchanges. He was questioned by Muslim
religious authorities, both Sunni and Shi'i, as well as Buddhist scholars
and Chinese physicians. One Greek doctor visiting the Ilkhanid court asked
Rashid al-Din whether the soul left the body with the blood. A Buddhist monk
challenged him to answer the famous riddle: which came first --- the chicken
or the egg? Rashid al-Din doesn't tell us what answer he gave in the moment,
but his subsequent reflections on the nature of divine and human knowledge
led him, he claims, to interpretations that lay beyond the Buddhist monk's
understanding.

Other questions were presented by the Mongol rulers themselves. They
were recent converts to Islam, and some of their questions concerned
Islam's religious teachings such as the relationship between kingship and
prophethood. In addition, the Prophet Muhammad's celestial ascension, or
mi'raj, shown here illustrated in the Edinburgh manuscript, was also a topic
in some of Rashid al-Din's treatises, which even discuss the nature of Buraq,
the Prophet's human-headed, flying steed.

Rashid al-Din also engaged in inter-religious disputations: he used rational,
scholastic arguments to refute the Buddhist belief in the reincarnation of
the soul and prove the Muslim dogma of the resurrection of the body after
death. A Jewish convert to Islam, he also disputed the Jewish faith by arguing
in favor of the Prophet Muhammad's abrogation of the Torah, using verses from
the Hebrew bible and his previous knowledge of Jewish tradition to support his
claims. Having no traditional religious Muslim education, Rashid al-Din prided
himself as being a self-trained scholar. However, his writings reveal that,
like other eminent scholars from the intellectual hubs of Mongol Iran, he was
influenced by broader intellectual changes the Islamic world was undergoing
in the 13th and 14th centuries --- especially the reconciliation of Islamic
theology and Greek-derived philosophy and logic.

A polymath, Rashid al-Din was also inspired by the broadening of the
intellectual horizons in the Mongol world. One of his most unique contributions
was in coordinating the first translation of Chinese medical writings into
an Indo-European language, Persian in this case. The translation was ordered
by Öljeitü, whom Rashid al-Din describes as a keen patron of scientific
exchanges across Mongol-ruled Eurasia and Iran. Rashid al-Din wrote a long
introduction to this text, which survives in a single hand-written copy
made during his lifetime and likely in his own scriptorium in Tabriz. Here
on the right, we see a page from that copy, with a corresponding image from a
woodblock print of a Chinese medical text on the left. Although he had no prior
knowledge of Chinese, Rashid al-Din passionately argues in his introduction
in favor of translating Chinese medical expertise, marvels at Chinese print
technology, and tells his readers about his efforts to unravel the mysteries
of the Chinese writing system and language. He was so impressed by Chinese
logographic script, which uses individual characters to represent entire words,
that he even suggests that Muslims should replace their alphabetic writing
systems with a logographic one. This would allow speakers of Persian, Arabic,
Turkish and other languages to read the same texts without having to learn
numerous languages.

Despite his illustrious career in government, in July 1318, Rashid al-Din
was accused by a rival at court of poisoning Öljeitü and was subsequently
executed alongside one of his sons. The execution did not diminish Rashid
al-Din's remarkable life or his legacy as the preeminent Ilkhanid historian
and intellectual. His historical writings influenced later authors in
Persianate courts such as the Timurids in Central Asia and the Mughals in
India, and his intellectual contributions, particularly his synthesis of
Islamic and Mongol ideas of kingship, also paved the way for new imperial
models in the early modern Islamic world. While Rashid al-Din's career and
life were unique, his impressive body of work, ranging from world history to
the translation of Chinese medical texts, epitomizes this pivotal moment in
global history. During the Mongol imperial era, objects, people, and knowledge
traversed the Silk Roads, linking Asia, the Islamicate world, and Europe on an
unprecedented scale, enabling Rashid al-Din's remarkable access to distant
histories, knowledge, and experts from Europe to China.
