Anyone who looked through an issue of Muhammad Speaks in the 1960s would
have probably come across artwork that affirmed and celebrated independent
Black education. Now at the time, mainstream papers were really focused on
educational deficiencies among Black children. In opposition to this, Muhammad
Speaks illustrated stories of dedicated and caring Black teachers with children
learning about the great accomplishments of Black and African peoples.

A lot of the artwork was focused on independent primary schools. But in the
mid-1960s, Eugene Majied started to illustrate a series that was focused on
Black-run colleges and universities. Now, the drawings were actually part of
a fundraising campaign for the establishment of a future Islamic university in
Chicago where Black Americans could learn to rise up and do for self.

Majied's illustrations included these imposing drawings of Black farmers
cultivating these vast tracts of land, Black architects and engineers designing
cityscapes with a university at the center. The artwork was often in color and
took up a full page or centerfold spread, all in a tabloid-sized newspaper so
we can imagine how expansive the images felt. There were often block letter
messages at the top of the artwork like a December 1965 issue that read,
"Re-educate the Black man so he can qualify for his own life."

The effort to establish an independent Black university fit really nicely
within the Nation of Islam's vision of uniting every good in Black communities
by building Black-run institutions. The Nation of Islam had itself established
businesses, schools, and farmland staffed with Black professionals serving
Black patrons. It was a vision of a university system that could scale up
leadership capacity for independent Black life.

Majied's drawings signaled to readers that the NOI was oriented towards
progress and promise. Now ultimately the Nation of Islam's schooling system
didn't establish a college or a university. However, the campaign's images
evoked a sense of possibility for both the Nation of Islam and all Black
people.

Majied's imagery in the education campaign represented a reimagining of Black
futures at a precarious moment where Black educators amidst unequal school
desegregation practices had begun to disappear from the profession altogether.
Majied's artwork visualized something different, visualized a future where
Black educators and professionals would not only exist, they would thrive.
