A two-page spread appeared in the August 21, 1970 copy of Muhammad
Speaks. Across four registers, NOI artist Eugene Majied states that he has
drawn the "Messenger Muhammad's Idea," as clearly noted in the lower right. The
composition aims to encapsulate Elijah Muhammad's definition of civilization
through the wearing of proper Muslim vestment.

On the right page, a thin vertical line separates two panels, each labeled
"Civilized" and "Uncivilized." The uncivilized half, on the right, depicts
three individuals in the foreground with large "unkempt" afros, uncovered legs
and arms, and patterned clothing reminiscent of the 1970s "Black is Beautiful"
and "Soul Style" movements. On the civilized side, to the left, a group of
men wear long robes, shalwars, turbans, and fezzes, suggesting a cultural
refinement through Islam, especially in an African context. Zooming in a bit
further, these men also appear racially diverse, especially in opposition to
the barefooted black bodies standing on the right.

Moving over to the left page of the spread, a question is posed to the viewers
and readers: "What is beautiful about wearing long hair? I can see nothing
about it but savagery!" The query hovers between a white and black man. Both
men have long, bushy beards and wild, disheveled hair. The black man on the
right seems to have locked the white man in his gaze, as if to follow or even
obey him.

In the final box of this spread, the text exclaims: "You are following them
into SAVAGERY!" Here, a group of black individuals run behind a shaggy white
savage man and his companion downwards, into the darkness. Bats fly out of a
concavity to signal the feral nature of the white cavemen.

In this graphic by Eugene Majied, Elijah Muhammad's ideas about the white
man as a "devil" and "savage" are on full display. The image warns those who
stray away from Black Islam, particularly the NOI, that they are embarked on a
civilizational decline, at the helm of which is the white man. The image also
lambasts the Soul Style of the time, thereby associating clothing fashion with
personal and cultural sophistication. Translating Elijah Muhammad's conceptual
ideas into visual form, NOI artist Eugene Majied issues a graphic injunction to
the Black readers of Muhammad Speaks to join the NOI by, among others, wearing
proper garb and making themselves "visibly Muslim" in the public sphere.
