In the summer of 1963, millions witnessed the Black freedom struggle as never
before. Televised scenes and front-page photographs of Martin Luther King's
Birmingham campaign, Medgar Evers' assassination, and the bombing of the 16th
Street Baptist Church created a visual narrative of brutal Southern white
violence against peaceful Black protest.

Nonviolent activism was designed to provoke confrontation, evoke national
sympathy, and compel federal intervention. Yet in Black communities, the wisdom
of nonviolence was hotly debated. On a national stage Malcolm X rejected the
philosophy of nonviolence, exposing the hypocrisy of white American violence and
admonishing Black political naivete.

Editors at Muhammad Speaks published prolific criticism of nonviolent
activism. In turn, Eugene Majied's cartoon, made in 1963, presents an aggressive
and captivating visual argument that exposes contradictions and pitfalls in
the nonviolence movement. His image also provides a window into the Nation
of Islams's religious and political worldview, which shaped its critique of
nonviolence.

This illustration by Eugene Majied is titled "But Never a Word About
Self-Defense!" Here, a Black woman lays on her back, with an agonized
expression, bleeding profusely from her head and mouth, as two white police
officers with menacing smiles press down on her: one with his knee on
her neck and the other restraining her wrist and pressing her torso as he
forcefully raises her left leg skyward. With bruised eyes she looks to her
right towards "Rev. M. L. King," shown crouching on his hands and knees while
holding a bible. King offers no assistance, except to pointedly admonish the
victim, saying "If there is any blood spilled in the streets, let it be our
blood!" Behind them, other officers assault Black women, with one officer
dangling a woman by her ankles as other white men violently tear the clothing
off the bruised, bleeding and weeping bodies of Black women detained in a patrol
wagon. In the furthest background, a courthouse bears the motto "Liberty and
Justice for All," while an American flag waves above.

Majied's image aims to undermine the moral high ground of nonviolence, depicting
it as submission to white violence. From the vantage point of the Nation of
Islam, it is also failure to protect Black women. A core tenet of the Nation of
Islam's religious framework requires Muslim men to physically protect women's
dignity and safety, by any means necessary. In her analysis of Malcolm X's
public discourse, historian Farah Jasmine Griffin described this as the NOI's
"price of protection" through which Black women receive a sense of safety
previously reserved for white women and in exchange, Black men attain a sense
of possession previously reserved only for white men. Majied's choice to depict
the physical and possible sexual violation of Black women likely struck Muslim
readers as a failure of religious obligation. It also evokes a broader sense of
moral failure to defend one's people.

The background imagery is significant. The purported American ideals of justice
and equality stand in stark contrast to the institutional and interpersonal
racism that has shaped American life. King's words further highlight this
contraction, demonstrating the hypocrisy of whites demanding nonviolence from
Black protesters while concurrently endorsing institutionalized white violence.

Hypocrisy also has a religious significance in Majied's oeuvre. In many of
his drawings, Majied seeks to expose the moral and spiritual corruption of
'hypocrites' who outwardly display a value they inwardly deny or refuse to
act upon. For instance, one of his popular drawings depicts "Uncle Sam" as a
"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" failing to live up to his moral claims.

In many Islamic communities, including the Nation of Islam, hypocrisy represents
a moral degradation. In place of King's philosophy, Majied highlights the
Islamic ideal of actively resisting hypocrisy. In sum, in the NOI's estimation,
standing firm against hypocrites is essential for spiritual and political
liberation, even if King and others fail to do so.
