From 1964, the fourth year of its publication, until its last run in 1975,
issues of Muhammad Speaks newspaper contained iconic illustrations by the
artist and illustrator Eugene Majied.

The top of each cover page showed the torsos of two Black men, one in the
east, the other in the west, stretching both arms toward one another so as
to clasp hands.

But it's another image that I want to focus on, now. It usually appeared
in the centerspread, and it depicted a world serpent squeezing numerous
human victims in all continents and island nations around our planet.
The serpent image is dramatic and complex, and it's plainly meant to
attract close attention from viewers. Majied titled this illustration, "The
Serpent Deceived the Whole World," and he included, as a sort of caption,
part of a verse from the King James version of the Book of Revelation, in
the Christian Bible: chapter 12, verse 9. The caption reads: "And the great
dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels
were cast out with him."

In Majied's drawing, that "old serpent" bears the face of a fiendish Uncle
Sam, a personification of the United States who was a stock figure in
many of Majied's satirical illustrations in Muhammad Speaks. Uncle Sam's
white-haired head rises out of the United States. His gaping mouth contains
recent human victims, identified as "Indians" and "Negroes." And just
under Uncle Sam's teeth, as part of the serpent's fangs, appear the words
"Negro Preachers and Politicians." As you scan the details in the rest of
the illustration, you will notice other captive populations, waiting to be
consumed, all bound in one of the numerous strangulating coils the serpent
has formed across the globe.

But there is one exception to humanity's fate. Only in Arabia, identified
as the "Garden of Paradise," is there resistance to the serpent. Arab
warriors armed with scimitars and mounted on camels are heading west out
of their homeland and toward the serpent. A caption nearby declares, that:
"To heal the poisonous bite of the world serpent, it takes the medicine
that God gives Muhammad." Which "Muhammad" is referred to is left open
to the reader to interpret; but, worthy of note is that the verb here, is
"gives," and not "gave." I have no doubt that Majied is referring here to
Elijah Muhammad, the Nation of Islam's leader also referred as the "Black
American medicine-giver," and the "Last Messenger of Allah." Some Muslims
could interpret the Muhammad referred to here as the Arab prophet Muhammad,
and indeed, Elijah's son and successor, Warith Deen Mohammed, wound up
doing after his father's death in 1975. He championed a more normative form
of Sunni Islam, and accepted the seventh-century prophet Muhammad as its
messenger.

Moreover, I find it illustrative, in a different sense, that in Wikipedia's
discussion of the long history of world-serpent imagery, there is no
mention of Majied's image. Yet people today would be better served by
learning about his world serpent, than those Wikipedia surveys at great
length. History abounds with forerunners of the image, from world-clasping
serpents like the mythological Norse Jörmungandr to the tail-biting
ouroboros of ancient Greek lore, to various other serpent legends and
images found in Egypt and India as well as South American and African
societies. You can read about them all at great length, but you'll find
no Uncle Sam serpent, in Wikipedia's entry. I see this as an instance of
conscious or unconscious censorship.

To me, the outstanding distinction in Majied's use of the image is that
he devised a way to depict the interrelated effects of imperialism and
racism. He fashioned a way to help viewers visualize the dynamic unity
of two threats to the well-being of the world: threats that all too
many people seem unable to focus on at the same time. Too many see this
as an "either-or" matter: but there's no contradiction between being
an anti-imperialist, and an anti-racist; in fact, if you want to rid
our country and the world of that serpent, it's advantageous --- even a
necessity --- to be both. That's Majied's message to me, and, why, I think
any discussion of world-serpent imagery ought to include this powerful
composition.
