Elijah Muhammad warned against Black integration into a white Christian
society, promoting instead Black separatism and self-determination under the
banner of Islam. Likewise, visual artists articulated African-American Muslim
futures through visual constructs, including this cartoon entitled "Whom
Shall You Serve?"

In this graphic made by NOI artist Eugene Majied and published in Muhammad
Speaks in September 1964, a two-panel image --- known as a diptych --- posits
salvation versus damnation in rather Manichaean terms.

On the left, Majied rhetorically asks his viewers whether they shall serve
Satan by illustrating a decrepit church over whose entrance is inscribed
"White Man's Slavery." A hunched-over Black man follows in the tracks of
affluent Christians decked in fur coats and top hats, while a smoldering sky
engulfs the necrotic body of Christ nailed to a flaming cross, the latter a
symbolic reference to KKK lynchings throughout the NOI's visual culture.

With a bridging ellipsis to the right frame, Majied proceeds with an
alternative query: namely, whether his viewers are willing to serve God. Here,
a domed mosque whose entrance is emblazoned with the Flag of Islam and the
inscription "God's Freedom" welcomes a row of Muslim faithful --- including
NOI women clad in their distinctive white robes and hijabs --- who make their
way into an architectural stand-in for deliverance from white supremacy and
Christian oppression. Rays of light pierce through the clouds, illuminating
the scene.

For the NOI, this type of either-or proposition extends historical Islamic
religious declarations while also echoing modern American political
speeches. From within Islamic traditions, these types of images execrate
Christian disbelief, while concurrently praising and proclaiming a loyalty
to Islam.

Not limited to Islamic religious spheres alone, excommunication, adherence,
and repudiation are also typical of polarized political environments. To gain
adherents, during the 1960s and 70s the NOI --- like many other organizations
and movements before and after --- here pitches a stark black-and-white choice
that rejects a third position or neutral middle-ground. As a result, this and
other oppositional graphics act as powerful "speech acts" in pictorial form,
in which the drawing of lines of contestation occurs across multiple registers,
including religious ones.
