One of the earliest graphics to appear in Muhammad Speaks graced its interior
pages in June 1963. Entitled "Unite and Do For Self!," it summarizes the
worldview of the Nation of Islam (NOI) at this early moment in the history of
the newspaper. The cartoon's title in the upper left calls upon Black community
members to bind together in order to achieve economic empowerment and
self-fulfillment.

This graphic was made by the famous NOI artist Eugene XXX, who signed his name
in the lower right corner. The three Xs here cancel his previous white name and
function as a placeholder for his later Muslim name of Eugene Majied. His
powerful composition aims to translate Elijah Muhammad's religious thoughts and
ideological positions, which include defending the NOI against accusations of
violence and extremism.

Looking at the image's details elucidates the messages that are embedded
within.

On the right, a cigar smoking peddler of KKK propaganda holds a printed sign
exclaiming that the Muslims are the same as the Klan. However, he is told to
move on by a Black man in a well-pressed suit, who goes on to say: "I've got
eyes, and I can see that you're lying!"

Behind them stands a large structure embodying a Muslim record of building
schools, businesses, and culture. Above this muscular edifice representing the
NOI's various accomplishments hovers its emblem, the so-called "Flag of Islam,"
emblazoned here by a crescent moon and star.

Above this flag, striated lines suggest an assembly's oral declaration as
originating from within the building. This declaration is the shahada or
Islamic religious creed that stipulates that: "There is no God but Allah [and]
Muhammad is His messenger." In this case, however, the shahada's two clauses
have been augmented with a third one that reads: "and the white devil is our
open enemy." Here, and in other cases, the NOI's shahada takes the foundational
creed of Islam and openly racializes it in order to construct a black-white
binary.

In this oppositional construct, the so called "white devil" is personified by
bloodstained members of the KKK as they carry whips and walk in unison. These
hooded men are strengthened and protected by security forces who wield rifles
and hold attack dogs, the latter a frequent beast symbol of police brutality
within NOI graphics.

While the NOI's "Muslim Record" radiates in the background, the foreground
depicts the KKK's century-old history of violence against members of the Black
community. This message is clearly inscribed in the brightly burning cross in
the foreground, behind which brutalized and deceased bodies accumulate into a
towering pile of devastation.

With regards to the cross, in his 1974 book entitled Our Saviour Has Arrived,
Elijah Muhammad calls it Christianity's "ghastly and shameful" emblem, going on
to say: "This is the very way that they lynch the so-called negroes, mutilating
their bodies, and then offering you a piece of the rope that the man was hung
with as a warning to you that you will be next" (Muhammad 1974, 154).

In sum, Eugene Majied's 1963 graphic in Muhammad Speaks encouraging Black unity
and empowerment serves as a reminder of white violence and also praises the
NOI's record, which is here shown as constructive rather than destructive.
