Decades before #blacklivesmatter, the newspaper Muhammad Speaks took an active
role in exposing police violence and mass incarceration.  The newspaper's
journalists provided first-hand reporting on high-profile cases, including
the 1962 killing of seven unarmed Muslims by the LAPD and the 1972 trial of
political activist Angela Davis. Beyond national headlines, Muhammad Speaks
embedded reporters across the United States to document local incidents of
police abuses, which were often ignored by the mainstream press.

Eugene Majied's illustrations invited readers to see these stories, not as
individual incidents, but as a pattern of deliberate violence to suppress the
Black freedom struggle. For example, the April 10, 1964 issue of the paper
includes a diptych (two side-by-side panels) by Majied. Mirroring one another,
the panels depict a Black man's face, down in a pool of his own blood, eyes
crossed out in death.

In the first frame on the left, a hooded Klansman is shown stomping his victim
while holding a flaming torch in one hand and a double-barrel shotgun in
the other. The Klansman's chest is emblazoned with the phrase "Old Fashioned
Lynch Mob." He is accompanied by another Klansman whose hand is gripping the
leashes of two bloodhounds barking and howling near the prone man's face. In
the distance is the haunting silhouette of a man suspended by a rope around his
neck, his body twisting under a branch. Here, Irving Berlin's 1927 hit "The Song
Is Ended (But the Melody Lingers On)" highlights the normality of white cruelty
against Black Americans.

In the second frame on the right, a uniformed police officer stomps on a
nearly identical Black man. The officer holds a billy club in one hand and a
shotgun in the other, while his uniform is emblazoned with the words "Police
Brutality." Behind him another officer smiles ear-to-ear as he grips the leash
of an attack dog with exposed teeth and menacing expression.

The bloodhounds in the first frame evoke memories of enslavers and lynch mobs
pursuing Black bodies. In the second frame, the unlawful killing of Black people
by government agents or proxies continues this legacy. By visually pairing
the lynch mob with the police, Majied disrupts the narrative arc of mainstream
Northern liberal newspapers that centered the horrors of Southern white violence
while ignoring nationwide anti-Black police violence.

Historian Clarence Taylor has argued that histories of the civil rights era have
long overlooked the Nation of Islam's role in exposing and resisting Northern
police brutality. That resistance included the visual narratives of Muhammad
Speaks' artists, like Eugene Majied, who sought to lay bare the evolution of
racial violence throughout the North and South.
