After Elijah Muhammad died in 1975, his son, Warith al-Deen Mohammed became
head of the Lost-Found Nation of Islam in the West. The NOI's newspaper,
Muhammad Speaks, was one of the principal ways W.D. Mohammed announced changes
in the direction of the organization, toward Sunni Islam. Some of those changes
included the institution of fasting during the month of Ramadan and praying the
traditional Islamic prayer in the mosque.

Another change was in the name of the newspaper, from Muhammad Speaks to
Bilalian News, in tribute to one of the first converts to Islam: the formerly
enslaved Bilal ibn Rabah. Bilal served as the Prophet Muhammad's muezzin, or
caller to prayer. The masthead of the October 24, 1975 issue of Muhammad Speaks
features another title behind the original --- Bilalian News --- with the new
title written in faded letters behind the old. Over the next three issues the
lettering of the new title would gradually become superimposed on the old and
eventually displace it --- signaling the Nation's new directions.

The front page of the October 24, 1975 issue of Muhammad Speaks includes the
headline, "Master Bilal," written in large block letters. Below the headline is
an illustration of a muezzin calling Muslims to prayer, his hands cupped behind
his ears to hear the acoustics of his own voice. In the illustration, sonic
waves emanate from the call like rays of the sun. What looks like a rising
sun suggests the dawn prayer, the fajr, an awakening, a new day, or the Muslim
sunrise in the West.

In the word bubble above the muezzin's head, the call, "Come to Worship," is
written in Arabic and translated into English. Below is written other words
from the call, "Come to Growth by Cultivation." The NOI artist Eugene Majied
also signed his name in Arabic, rather than the Latin letters he previously
used. Around the sun's aureola appear the words, "honey of one color from
many flowers" --- referring to Sufi interpretations of verses 68 & 69 of the
Qur'an chapter, "The Bee." These words speak to W.D. Mohammed's embrace of the
diversity of color in Islam as something sweet.

This diversity is reflected in the illustration of the crowd listening to
the call, as well as in the photographs inside the issue that show Muslims of
different backgrounds and orientations joined in prayer. In the photographs,
W.D. Mohammed leads the prayer at Chicago's Temple No. 2, with the caption:
"Muslims of all nationalities and colors kneel en masse in prayer."

Two weeks later, the November 7, 1975 issue of Muhammad Speaks featured another
illustration of Bilal, but on the Women's page, "New Frontiers," that was
created and edited by the poet Sonia Sanchez. The illustration shows Bilal,
issuing the call to prayer, with Muslims lined up, prostrating themselves
in a mosque. Alongside the illustration, by Charles 6X, is an article,
authored by Sanchez, about Bilal and the call to prayer. Entitled, "Did you
know?," the article is signed under Sanchez's new Muslim name, Laila Mannan,
which W.D. Mohammed gave her during Ramadan of that year. Sanchez's article
discusses biographical details about Bilal from the Islamic tradition. She also
transcribes the words of the call to prayer, including Allahu Akbar, "God is
Great," in both transliterated Arabic and in English translation.

The bismallah, "In the name of God," written in Arabic appeared for the
first time in April 1975, just after the death of Elijah Muhammad. It was
the culmination of three issues of Muhammad Speaks devoted to "The Second
Resurrection" of Islam in the West. In NOI teachings, the first resurrection
is the resurrection of Islam under Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad, and
W.D. Muhammad talked about a second resurrection as he turned the NOI toward
Sunni Islam.

The first issue of Bilalian News reinterpreted the traditional masthead of
Muhammad Speaks by placing the bismallah at the very top. It also reinterpreted
Eugene Majied's classic image of two Black men from Asia and Africa joining
hands across the globe, the sun rising behind their clasped hands. In the new
illustration for Bilalian News, the sun no longer rises over the US, but as the
light of truth from the Qur'an, shining on the "Universal Nation of Islam." The
Bilalian News sought to root the community in a universal nation of Islam
while still paying tribute to its Black roots --- signaled by the figure of the
Ethiopian Bilal as one of Islam's first converts and its first muezzin calling
Muslims to prayer.
